rua sunnaw ou curua 35

hardly less terrible. The chief causes oi
this chaos were the-complete decay of civil ¹
control over the military forces of the
empire; the growth of capitalism and the
concentration of capital in the hands of the
governing class at Rome; and the economic
disorder springing from the methods of
ancient warfare‚ especially the enormous
growth of slavery and the depopulation of
ltatyn They are all summed up in that
tremendous Ergo in the conclusion10f the
First Georgic‚ which attributes the miseries
of mankind directly to the just wrath of
heaven.

“Thereiore it was that twice Philippi saw
The clash oi Roman swords in Roman hands ;

Nor did high heaven disdain twice to enrich
Τὴε broad Thessalian plain with Roman blood.''

And the same evils have their place in the
famous contrast between the peaceful toil of
the farmer and the corrupt, reckless ambitions
oi political life, which closes the Second

¹ G. i. 489:
Ergo inter sese paribus concurrere telis
Romanas acies iterum uidere Philippi.
Nec fuit indignum superis bis sanguine nostro
Emathiam et latos Haemi pinguescere campos.

 

